Geo_grid ingest processor docs (#93507)
elastic/elasticsearch: docs/reference/ingest/processors/geo-grid.asciidoc

[role="xpack"]
[[ingest-geo-grid-processor]]
=== Geo-grid processor
++++
<titleabbrev>Geo-grid</titleabbrev>
++++

Converts geo-grid definitions of grid tiles or cells to regular bounding boxes or polygons which describe their shape.
This is useful if there is a need to interact with the tile shapes as spatially indexable fields.
For example the `geotile` field value `"4/8/3"` could be indexed as a string field, but that would not enable
any spatial operations on it.

> Instead we should convert it to the value

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Instead, convert it to the value
```

| `field`                     | yes       | -         | The field to interpret as a geo-tile. The field format is determined by the `tile_type`.
| `tile_type`                 | yes       | -         | Three tile formats are understood: `geohash`, `geotile` and `geohex`.
| `target_field`              | no        | `field`   | The field to assign the polygon shape to, by default `field` is updated in-place.
| `parent_field`              | no        | -         | If specified and a parent tile exists, save that tile address to this field.
| `children_field`            | no        | -         | If specified and children tiles exist, save those tile addresses to this field as an array of strings.
| `non_children_field`        | no        | -         | If specified and intersecting non-child tiles exist, save their addresses to this field as an array of strings.
| `precision_field`           | no        | -         | If specified, save the tile precision (zoom) as an integer to this field.
| `ignore_missing`            | no        | -         | If `true` and `field` does not exist, the processor quietly exits without modifying the document.

> | `target_format`             | no        | "GEOJSON" | Which format to save the generated polygon in. Either `WKT` or `GeoJSON`.

Reviewer: I'm assuming this is case-insensitive, but maybe it would be good to be consistent between "GEOJSON" and `GeoJSON`?

include::common-options.asciidoc[]
|======

To demonstrate the usage of this ingest processor, consider an index called `geocells`
with a mapping for a field `geocell` of type `geo_shape`.

> In order to populate that index using `geotile` and `geohex` fields, we would need to define

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to populate that index using `geotile` and `geohex` fields, define
```

two ingest processors:

[source,console]
--------------------------------------------------
PUT geocells
{
  "mappings": {
    "properties": {
      "geocell": {
        "type": "geo_shape"
      }
    }
  }
}

PUT _ingest/pipeline/geotile2shape
{
  "description": "translate rectangular z/x/y geotile to bounding box",
  "processors": [
    {
      "geo_grid": {
        "field": "geocell",
        "tile_type": "geotile"
      }
    }
  ]
}

PUT _ingest/pipeline/geohex2shape
{
  "description": "translate H3 cell to polygon",
  "processors": [
    {
      "geo_grid": {
        "field": "geocell",
        "tile_type": "geohex",
        "target_format": "wkt"
      }
    }
  ]
}
--------------------------------------------------

> Using the two pipelines above, we can attempt to index documents into the `geocells` index.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These two pipelines can be used to index documents into the `geocells` index.
```

[source,console]
--------------------------------------------------
PUT geocells/_doc/1?pipeline=geotile2shape
{
  "geocell": "4/8/5"
}

GET geocells/_doc/1
--------------------------------------------------
// TEST[continued]

The response shows how the ingest-processor has replaced the `geocell` field with an indexable `geo_shape`:

[source,console-result]
--------------------------------------------------
{
 "_index": "geocells",
  "_id": "1",
  "_version": 1,
  "_seq_no": 0,
  "_primary_term": 1,
  "found": true,
  "_source": {
    "geocell": {
      "type": "Envelope",
      "coordinates": [
        [ 0.0, 55.77657301866769 ],
        [ 22.5, 40.979898069620134 ]
      ]
    }
  }
}
--------------------------------------------------
// TESTRESPONSE[s/"_version": \d+/"_version": $body._version/ s/"_seq_no": \d+/"_seq_no": $body._seq_no/ s/"_primary_term": 1/"_primary_term": $body._primary_term/]

image:images/spatial/geogrid_tile.png[Kibana map with showing the geotile at 4/8/5 and its four child cells]

==== Example: Hexagonal geo-tile with polygon in WKT format

In this example a `geocell` field with an H3 string address is indexed as a

> https://docs.opengeospatial.org/is/12-063r5/12-063r5.html[WKT Polygon], since the ingest-processor explicitly
> defined the `target_format` above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
https://docs.opengeospatial.org/is/12-063r5/12-063r5.html[WKT Polygon], since this ingest processor explicitly
defined the `target_format`.
```

PUT geocells/_doc/1?pipeline=geohex2shape
{
  "geocell": "811fbffffffffff"
}

GET geocells/_doc/1
--------------------------------------------------
// TEST[continued]

The response shows how the ingest-processor has replaced the `geocell` field with an indexable `geo_shape`:

[source,console-result]
--------------------------------------------------
{
 "_index": "geocells",
  "_id": "1",
  "_version": 1,
  "_seq_no": 0,
  "_primary_term": 1,
  "found": true,
  "_source": {
    "geocell": "POLYGON ((1.1885095294564962 49.470279179513454, 2.0265689212828875 45.18424864858389, 7.509948452934623 43.786609335802495, 12.6773177459836 46.40695743262768, 12.345747342333198 50.55427505169064, 6.259687012061477 51.964770150370896, 3.6300085578113794 50.610463307239115, 1.1885095294564962 49.470279179513454))"
  }
}
--------------------------------------------------
// TESTRESPONSE[s/"_version": \d+/"_version": $body._version/ s/"_seq_no": \d+/"_seq_no": $body._seq_no/ s/"_primary_term": 1/"_primary_term": $body._primary_term/]

image:images/spatial/geogrid_h3.png[Kibana map with showing an H3 cell, and its seven child cells]

==== Example: Enriched tile details

> As described in the <<geo-grid-processor-options,geo_grid processor options>> above,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As described in <<geo-grid-processor-options,geo_grid processor options>>,
```

there are many other fields that can be set, which will enrich the information available.
For example, with H3 tiles there are 7 child tiles, but only the first is fully contained by the parent.
The remaining six are only partially overlapping the parent, and there exist a further six non-child tiles
that overlap the parent.
This can be investigated by adding parent and child additional fields to the ingest-processor:

[source,console]
--------------------------------------------------
PUT _ingest/pipeline/geohex2shape
{
  "description": "translate H3 cell to polygon with enriched fields",
  "processors": [
    {
      "geo_grid": {
        "description": "Ingest H3 cells like '811fbffffffffff' and create polygons",
        "field": "geocell",
        "tile_type": "geohex",
        "target_format": "wkt",
        "target_field": "shape",
        "parent_field": "parent",
        "children_field": "children",
        "non_children_field": "nonChildren",
        "precision_field": "precision"
      }
    }
  ]
}
--------------------------------------------------

> Now when we index the document we will see a different result.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Index the document to see a different result:
```

[source,console]
--------------------------------------------------
PUT geocells/_doc/1?pipeline=geohex2shape
{
  "geocell": "811fbffffffffff"
}

GET geocells/_doc/1
--------------------------------------------------
// TEST[continued]

> The response from the above index request:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The response from this index request:
```

--------------------------------------------------
{
  "_index": "geocells",
  "_id": "1",
  "_version": 1,
  "_seq_no": 0,
  "_primary_term": 1,
  "found": true,
  "_source": {
    "parent": "801ffffffffffff",
    "geocell": "811fbffffffffff",
    "precision": 1,
    "shape": "POLYGON ((1.1885095294564962 49.470279179513454, 2.0265689212828875 45.18424864858389, 7.509948452934623 43.786609335802495, 12.6773177459836 46.40695743262768, 12.345747342333198 50.55427505169064, 6.259687012061477 51.964770150370896, 3.6300085578113794 50.610463307239115, 1.1885095294564962 49.470279179513454))",
    "children": [
      "821f87fffffffff",
      "821f8ffffffffff",
      "821f97fffffffff",
      "821f9ffffffffff",
      "821fa7fffffffff",
      "821faffffffffff",
      "821fb7fffffffff"
    ],
    "nonChildren": [
      "821ea7fffffffff",
      "82186ffffffffff",
      "82396ffffffffff",
      "821f17fffffffff",
      "821e37fffffffff",
      "82194ffffffffff"
    ]
  }
}
--------------------------------------------------
// TESTRESPONSE[s/"_version": \d+/"_version": $body._version/ s/"_seq_no": \d+/"_seq_no": $body._seq_no/ s/"_primary_term": 1/"_primary_term": $body._primary_term/]

> This additional information will then allow us to, for example, create a visualization of the H3 cell,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This additional information will then enable, for example, creating a visualization of the H3 cell,
```
